---
title:  2017
date: 2017-06-01
template: page.html
---


<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: right;">9.30 – 10.00</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Welcome with Tea and Coffee</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.00 – 11.10</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span> Session 1</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Peter
Hoefner</strong></span><br />
<em>Forwards and Backwards in Separation Algebra</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Rajeev
Gore</strong></span><br />
<em>Modular Automated Proof Search in Separation Logics</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.10 – 11.40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.40 – 12.50</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span> Session 2</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Carroll
Morgan</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>An experiment in data-refinement and atomisation<br />
in rely-guarantee reasoning</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob van
Glabbeek</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A classification of fairness assumptions</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.50 – 14.20</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.20 – 15.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span> Session 3</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Kai
Engelhardt</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A Better Composition Operator for
Quantitative Information Flow Analyses</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Dirk
Pattinson</strong></span><br />
<em>Schulze Voting as Evidence Carrying Computation</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.30 – 16.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.00 – 17.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span> Session 4</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Mark
Utting</strong></span><br />
<em>Learning to Make Whiley Boogie!</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Sergiy
Bogomolov</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Towards Scalable Verification of Cyber-Physical
Systems</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Jin Song
Dong</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Event Analytics</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">18.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Closing</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Peter Hoefner  

***Forwards and Backwards in Separation Algebra*  
(joint work with C. Bannister and G. Klein)**

  

Separation algebra is a formal and abstract algebraic framework to
describe separation logic. So far separation algebra was mainly used as
an abstract base to reason about heaps. I will present an algebraic
framework that allows backward reasoning using weakest preconditions,
and forward reasoning using strongest postconditions for separation
algebra; and hence also for separation logic. While the former is well
understood, the later requires the introduction of a new operator. Since
this is work in progress I will point at some surprising algebraic
problems that need to be solved within the setting of forward reasoning.

Rajeev Gore  

***Modular Automated Proof Search in Separation Logics***

  

I will present a labelled sequent calculus which can be tailored for
separation logics. I will describe how we developed a method for
proof-search using this sequent calculus and describe some experiments
that compared it with other proof methods for separation logics. Our
work nicely complements the work of Hoefner, Bannister and Klein on
building a tool for analysing the correctness of programs based upon
separation algebras.

Carroll Morgan  

***An experiment in data-refinement and atomisation  
in rely-guarantee reasoning***

  

Current work in Trustworthy Systems at Data 61 is exploring the extent
to which rely/guarantee reasoning can be used for developing concurrent
(even multi-core) operating-system code by refinement; and of particular
interest is data-refinement and refinement of atomicity. Exploring those
issues with a very simple algorithm (but famous: Peterson’s) has
uncovered some interesting and unexpected issues, which I will explain.

Rob van Glabbeek  

***A classification of fairness assumptions***

Fairness assumptions are crucial in the verification of liveness
properties. In this talk I will present a classification of various
fairness assumptions found in the literature, and present examples
showing the difference between the various notions. (One point in the
classification is our own notion of justness, about which I talked last
year.)

Kai Engelhardt  

***A Better Composition Operator for Quantitative Information Flow
Analyses***

  

Given a description of the quantitative information flow (qif) for
components, how can we determine the qif of a system composed from
components? We explore this fundamental question mathematically and
provide an answers based on a new composition operator. We investigate
its properties and prove that it generalises existing composition
operators. We illustrate the results with a fresh look on Chaum’s dining
cryptographers. We show that the new operator enjoys various convenient
algebraic properties and that it is well-behaved under composition
refinement.

Dirk Pattinson  

***Schulze Voting as Evidence Carrying Computation***

  

The correctness of vote counting in electronic election is one of the
main pillars that engenders trust in electronic elections. However, the
present state of the art in vote counting leaves much to be desired:
while some jurisdictions publish the source code of vote counting code,
others treat the code as commercial in confidence. None of the systems
in use today applies any formal verification. In this paper, we formally
specify the so-called Schulze method, a vote counting scheme that is
gaining popularity on the open source community. The cornerstone of our
formalisation is a (dependent, inductive) type that represents all
correct executions of the vote counting scheme. Every inhabitant of this
type not only gives a final result, but also all intermediate steps that
lead to this result, and can so be externally verified. As a
consequence, we do not even need trust the execution of the (verified)
algorithm: the correctness of a particular run of the vote counting code
can be verified on the basis of the evidence for correctness that is
produced along with determination of election winners.

Mark Utting  

***Learning to Make Whiley Boogie!***

  

In this talk, we explore the use of Boogie as an intermediate
verification language for verifying programs in Whiley. This is
noteworthy because the Whiley language has (amongst other things) a rich
type system with considerable potential for an impedance mismatch. We
report that, whilst a naive translation to Boogie is unsatisfactory, a
more abstract encoding is surprisingly effective.

Sergiy Bogomolov  

***Towards Scalable Verification of Cyber-Physical Systems***

  

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are networks of physical and digital
components and present a next generation of large-scale
highly-interconnected networked embedded systems. On the one hand, CPS
open enormous opportunities as they form the core of emerging smart
devices and services which are going to revolutionize many traditional
industries such as transportation and traffic management, power
generation and delivery, as well as manufacturing. On the other hand,
highly autonomous systems pose special engineering challenges as any
unexpected behaviour might lead to large financial losses or even human
deaths.

In this talk, we address this challenge and propose automatic techniques
to analyze CPS. For this purpose, we use the concept of hybrid automata
which has proven to be particularly useful to model CPS. We give an
overview of techniques to ensure efficient analysis of hybrid automata.
In particular, we present support-function based representation of
region state space and discuss ways to refine it.

Jin Song Dong  

***Event Analytics***

  

The process analysis toolkit (PAT) integrates the expressiveness of
state, event, time, and probability-based languages with the power of
model checking. PAT currently supports various modeling languages with
many application domains and has attracted thousands of registered users
from hundreds of organizations. In this talk, we will present the PAT
approach to "Event Analytics" (EA) which is beyond "Data Analytics". The
EA research is based on applying model checking to event planning,
scheduling, prediction, strategy analysis and decision making. Various
EA research directions will be discussed.
