---
title: 2018
date: 2018-06-01
template: page.html
---

<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Thursday, 07 June
2018</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.30 – 10.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Welcome</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.00 – 10.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Rajeev
Gore</strong></span><br/>
<em>Well-Founded Unions</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.45 – 11.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.15 – 12.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Ian
Hayes</strong></span><br />
<em>Challenges of specifying concurrent program components</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.00 – 14.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.00 – 14.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Sergiy
Bogolomov</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Time-Triggered Conversion of Guards for<br />
Reachability Analysis of Hybrid Automata</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.45 – 15.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Nicholas
Coughlin</strong></span><br />
<em>Verified Value Numbering in CakeML</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.30 – 16.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.00 – 16.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Hira
Syeda</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Program Verification in the Presence<br />
of Cached Address Translation</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.45 – 17.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob
Colvin</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A wide-spectrum language for verification<br />
of programs on weak memory models</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">18.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Dinner</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Friday, 08 June
2018</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.00 – 9.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Colin
Fidge</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Low-Level Network Behaviour Analysis using<br />
Model Checking</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.45 – 10.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span><strong>Peter
H<span>ö</span>fner</strong></span><br />
<em>Using Process Algebra to Design Better Protocols</em></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.30 – 11.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.00 – 11.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Dirk
Pattinson</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Modular Formalisation and Verification of STV<br />
Algorithms</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.45 – 12.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Jim
McCarthy</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Questioning Formal Methods in Defence Science and
Technology</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.30 – 14.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.30 – 15.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Patrick
Meiring</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Type Labels: An Approach for Capability-Based<br />
Access Control in Java</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.15 – 15.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Xi
Wu</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Type Capabilities for Object-Oriented Programming<br />
Languages</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.45 – 16.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.15 – 17.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob van
Glabbeek</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Is speed-independent mutual exclusion
implementable?</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">17.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Close of workshop</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Rajeev Gore  

***Well-Founded Unions*  
(joint work with Jeremy Dawson and Nachum Dershowitz)**

  

Given two or more well-founded (terminating) binary relations, when can
one be sure that their union is likewise well-founded? We suggest new
conditions for an arbitrary number of relations, generalising known
conditions for two relations. We also provide counterexamples to several
potential weakenings. All proofs have been machine checked.

Ian Hayes  

***Challenges of specifying concurrent program components***

  

The purpose of this talk is to review some of the challenges of formally
specifying components of shared-memory concurrent programs. The focus is
to provide an abstract specification of a component that is suitable for
use both by clients of the component and as a starting point for
refinement to an implementation of the component. We present some
approaches to devising specifications, investigating different forms of
specification suitable for different contexts. We examine handling
atomicity of access to data structures, blocking operations and progress
properties, and transactional operations that may fail and need to be
retried.

Sergiy Bogomolov  

***Time-Triggered Conversion of Guards for Reachability  
Analysis of Hybrid Automata***

  

A promising technique for the formal verification of embedded and
cyber-physical systems is flow-pipe construction, which creates a
sequence of regions covering all reachable states over time. Flow-pipe
construction methods can check whether specifications are met for all
states, rather than just testing using a finite and incomplete set of
simulation traces. A fundamental challenge when using flow-pipe
construction on high-dimensional systems is the cost of geometric
operations, such as intersection and convex hull. In this talk, we
address this challenge by showing that it is often possible to remove
the need to perform high-dimensional geometric operations by combining
two model transformations, direct time-triggered conversion and dynamics
scaling. Further, we discuss how to make the overapproximation error in
the conversion arbitrarily small. Finally, we show that our
transformation-based approach enables the analysis of a drivetrain
system with up to 51 dimensions.

Nicholas Coughlin  

***Verified Value Numbering in CakeML***

CakeML is a functional programming language with a proven correct
compiler and runtime, implemented and verified in HOL4 logic. The
compilation process features several intermediary languages,
particularly an imperative style, SSA-like language operating over
machine words named WordLang. Construction of this IL consists of a
lowering from a high level IL into corresponding WordLang snippets,
often resulting in a suboptimal representation. To improve the quality
of the generated code, a value numbering analysis and a series of
optimisations have been added as a single pass over WordLang, along with
corresponding proofs for the preservation of semantics across these
transformations and limited validation of optimising behaviours. The
pass is fully implemented in HOL4 logic and translatable into CakeML
using the project’s existing proof producing translator, to enable
in-logic bootstrapping.

The value numbering implementation consists of a directed acyclic graph
encoding of deterministic expressions, with vertices and edges
representing operations and operands respectively, as well as several
maps to enable quick value number lookups. Optimisations include common
subexpression elimination, limited code motion, constant folding and
copy propagation. The majority of these are restricted to operating over
extended basic blocks, with only a subset of value numbering information
being held globally.

The value numbering analysis retains several invariants, such as
well-formedness properties of its graph structure, as well as
equivalence between the evaluation semantics of its DAG representation
and the original program. Optimisations then demonstrate equivalence
between evaluation semantics of the DAG and the optimised program. These
are composed to demonstrate the preservation of semantics across the
pass.

The pass has proven to be effective in eliminating repeated memory
address calculations and accesses. However, limitations due to the
opaqueness of garbage collector behaviour in WordLang’s semantics
prevent future improvement here. Instead, future work will likely be
directed towards similar passes at more abstract ILs.

Jim McCarthy  

***Questioning Formal Methods in Defence Science and Technology***

  

Defence is rife with critical systems which must satisfy safety,
security, and mission-suitability properties. They can be large-scale,
require through-life maintenance and adjustment, and operate in
uncertain environments. Here we consider the proposed and actual use of
formal methods when accrediting these systems as fit for deployment. We
suggest that current formal methods tools are inadequate for such
systems in general, and outline some projects we are pursuing at DST
Group with the aim of informing the development of the next generation
of tools.

Hira Syeda  

***Program Verification in the Presence of Cached Address  
Translation***

  

Operating system (OS) kernels achieve isolation between user-level
processes using multi-level page tables and translation lookaside
buffers (TLBs). Controlling the TLB correctly is a fundamental security
property — yet all large-scale formal OS verification projects leave
correct functionality of the TLB as an assumption. We present a logic
for reasoning about low-level programs in the presence of TLB address
translation. We extract invariants and necessary conditions for correct
TLB operation that mirror the informal reasoning of OS engineers. Our
program logic reduces to a standard logic for user-level reasoning,
reduces to side-condition checks for kernel-level reasoning, and can
handle typical OS kernel tasks such as context switching and page table
manipulations.

Robert Colvin  

***A wide-spectrum language for verification of programs on weak  
memory models*  
(joint work with Graeme Smith)**

  

Modern processors deploy a variety of weak memory models, which for
efficiency reasons may (appear to) execute instructions in an order
different to that specified by the program text. The consequences of
instruction reordering can be complex and subtle, and can impact on
ensuring correctness. Previous work on the semantics of weak memory
models has focussed on the behaviour of assembler-level programs. In
this paper we utilise that work to extract some general principles
underlying instruction reordering, and apply those principles to a
wide-spectrum language encompassing abstract data types as well as
low-level assembler code . The goal is to support reasoning about
implementations of data structures for modern processors with respect to
an abstract specification.

Specifically, we encode a weak memory model in a pair-wise reordering
relation on instructions. Some architectures require an additional
definition of the behaviour of the global storage system if it does not
provide multi-copy atomicity. In this paper we use the reordering
relation in an operational semantics. We derive some properties of
program refinement under weak memory models, and encode the semantics in
the rewriting engine Maude as a model-checking tool. The tool is used to
validate the semantics against the behaviour of a set of litmus tests
(small assembler programs) run on hardware, and also to model check
implementations of data structures from the literature against their
abstract specifications.

Colin Fidge  

***Low-Level Network Behaviour Analysis using Model Checking*  
(joint work with Doug Brown)**

  

Understanding the emergent behaviours of computer communications
networks is challenging. Here we show how model checking can be used to
search for design flaws in standard low-level communications protocols,
through appropriate modelling and abstraction. Protocols were modelled
at the physical, data link and logical OSI layers and the subsequent
automated analysis exposed some potential design weaknesses and security
threats.

Peter Höfner  

***Using Process Algebra to Design Better Protocols***

  

Protocol design, development and standardisation still follow the lines
of rough consensus and running code. This approach yields fast and
impressive results in a sense that protocols are actually implemented
and shipped, but comes at a price: protocol specifications, which are
mainly written in natural languages without presenting a formal
specification, are (excessively) long, ambiguous, underspecified and
erroneous. These shortcomings are neither new nor surprising, and well
documented. It is the purpose of this talk to provide further evidence
that formal methods in general and process algebras in particular can
overcome these problems. They provide powerful tools that help to
analyse and evaluate protocols, already during the design phase. To
illustrate this claim, I report how a combination of pen-and-paper
analysis, model checking and interactive theorem proving has helped to
perform a formal analysis of the Ad hoc On-Demand Vector (AODV) routing
protocol.

Dirk Pattinson  

***Modular Formalisation and Verification of STV Algorithms*  
(joint work with Milad K. Ghale, Rajeev Gore and Mukesh Tiwari)**

  

We introduce a formal, modular framework that captures a large number of
different instances of the Single Transferable Vote (STV) counting
scheme in a uniform way. The framework requires that each instance
defines the precise mechanism of counting and transferring ballots,
electing and eliminating candidates. From formal proofs of basic sanity
condition for each mechanism inside the Coq theorem prover, we then
synthesise code that implements the given scheme in a provably correct
way and produces a universally verifiable certificate of the count. We
have applied this to various variations of STV, including several used
in Australian parliamentary elections and demonstrate the feasibility of
our approach by means of real-world case studies.

Patrick Meiring  

***Type Labels: An Approach for Capability-Based  
Access Control in Java***

  

This paper explores the use of a type system for controlling indirect
access to resources in Java. We propose a labelling system which is
based on restricting the propagation of references to capabilities.
Through the use of our labelling system, we are able to provide static
guarantees on the use of resources by an application. Although
coarse-grained, these guarantees are in many respects stronger than
those of the current Java security model. Key challenges addressed by
our work are how to control the ambient authority provided by static
fields and methods in a language like Java, and how to track the
delegation of capabilities in programs incorporating rich type
hierarchies.

Xi Wu  

***Type Capabilities for Object-Oriented Programming Languages***

  

Capabilities are used to restrict access to resources. However, without
further control on the propagation of capabilities, they may be
potentially obtained by unauthorised code. In this paper, we present a
type system to enforce the proper use of capabilities by type checking
at compile time, providing desired security guarantees (e.g.,
restricting capabilities only to authorised code) statically.
Capabilities are regarded as types and granted to code based on
user-defined policy files. In order to provide a finer-grained access to
resources, we introduce parameterized capability types by adding string
parameters into capabilities to illustrate on which targets these
capabilities can be used, and we also apply this model on the case study
of Java file access.

Rob van Glabbeek  

***Is speed-independent mutual exclusion implementable?***

  

A mutual exclusion algorithm is called speed independent if its
correctness does not depend on the relative speed of the components.
Famous mutual exclusion protocols such as Dekker’s, Peterson’s and
Lamport’s bakery are meant to be speed independent.

In this talk I argue that speed-independent mutual exclusion may not be
implementable on standard hardware, depending on how we believe reading
and writing to a memory location is really carried out. It can be
implemented on electrical circuits, however.

This builds on previous work showing that mutual exclusion cannot be
accurately modelled in standard process algebras.

