---
title: 2019
date: 2019-06-01
template: page.html
---

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Monday, 03 June
2019</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.30 – 10.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Welcome</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.00 – 10.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Peter
H<span>ö</span>fner</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Sometimes Less is More: Why too many input languages can harm a
system or tool</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.45 – 11.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.15 – 12.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Guangdong
Bai</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Towards Model Checking Event-driven<br />
Android Applications for Security Properties</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.00 – 14.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.00 – 14.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Nicholas
Coughlin</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Value-dependent information-flow security on<br />
weak memory models</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.45 – 15.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob
Colvin</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A semantics of speculative execution for reasoning about security
vulnerabilities</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.30 – 16.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.00 – 16.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Graeme
Smith</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Correctness of concurrent library components</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.45 – 17.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Lindsay
Groves</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Verifying programs that use concurrent data
structures</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">18.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Dinner at The Charming Squire, Southbank
(a ferry ride away)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Tuesday, 04 June
2019</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.00 – 9.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Walter
Guttmann</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Connecting Fixpoints of Computations with<br />
Strict Progress</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">9.45 – 10.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Larissa
Meinicke</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>An algebraic treatment of local variables in rely/guarantee
concurrency</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">10.30 – 11.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.00 – 11.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Dirk
Pattinson</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Modular Synthesis of Verified Verifiers of Computation with STV
Algorithms</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">11.45 – 12.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Mark
Utting</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Verifying Whiley Programs with Boogie</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">12.30 – 14.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">14.15 – 15.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Henry
O’Brien</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Challenges in Formal Verification of<br />
Software Defined Networks</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.00 – 15.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob van
Glabbeek</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A Process Algebra for Link Layer Protocols</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">15.45 – 16.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">16.15 – 17.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Patrick
Meiring</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Sandbox Types for Object-Capabilities</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: right;">17.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Close of workshop</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Peter Höfner

**Sometimes Less is More: Why too many input languages can harm a system
or tool**

  

Over the last decade we have seen that standard tools accept more and
more input languages. For example it is nowadays standard that a model
checker accepts more than three input languages. At first glance the
benefit for the user is undeniable. But are there any drawbacks in this
approach?

In this talk I will argue that the addition of input languages have to
be taken seriously and one has to act with a lot of caution. I will show
that without caution the model checker may produce false results. I will
also report on a case study where we added the language AWN to the set
of input languages of the the model checker mCRL2. The case study
revealed not only some traps one may fall into when adding another input
language, but also shows the expenses (time-wise and money-wise) of such
an extension.

Guangdong Bai

** Towards Model Checking Event-driven Android Applications for  
Security Properties **

  

As feature-rich Android applications are increasingly popularized in
security-sensitive scenarios, methods to verify their security
properties are highly desirable. This talk will introduce our approach
that uses software model checking technique to verify Android apps. We
have built a general framework named DroidPF upon Java PathFinder (JPF).
It enables to explore the concrete state spaces, addresses the challenge
caused by event-driven execution paradigm, and alleviates state space
explosion. DroidPF has been evaluated with real-world apps, third-party
libraries, malware samples and benchmarks. It precisely identifies
nearly all of the previously known security issues and several
previously unreported vulnerabilities/bugs.

Nicholas Coughlin

**Value-dependent information-flow security on weak memory  
models**

  

Weak memory models implemented on modern multicore processors are known
to affect the correctness of concurrent code. They can also affect
whether or not the code is secure. This is particularly the case in
programs where the security levels of variables are value-dependent,
i.e., depend on the values of other variables. In this talk, we will
illustrate how instruction reordering allowed by contemporary multicore
processors leads to vulnerabilities in such programs, and preset a
compositional timing-sensitive information-flow logic which can be used
to detect such vulnerabilities. The logic allows step-local reasoning
(one instruction at a time) about a thread’s security by tracking
information about dependencies between instructions which guarantee
their order of occurrence. Program security can then be established from
individual thread security using rely/guarantee reasoning.

Rob Colvin

**A semantics of speculative execution for reasoning about security
vulnerabilities**

  

Reasoning about correctness and security of software is increasingly
difficult due to the complexity of modern microarchitectural features
such as out-of-order execution. A class of security vulnerabilities
termed Spectre that exploits side effects of speculative, out-of-order
execution was announced in 2018 and has since drawn much attention. In
this paper we formalise speculative execution and its side effects as an
extension of a framework for reasoning about out-of-order execution in
weak memory models. Our goal is to allow speculation to be reasoned
about abstractly at the software level, and hence a key aspect of this
work is to have a detailed enough model to enable specification of the
relevant microarchitectural features, but at a high enough level to
permit abstract reasoning techniques. We add an abstract cache to the
global state of the system, and derive some general refinement rules
that expose cache side effects due to speculative loads. The rules are
encoded in a simulation tool, which we use to analyse an abstract
specification of a Spectre attack and vulnerable code fragments.

Graeme Smith

**Correctness of concurrent library components**

  

Specifications of concurrent objects abstract from the interleaving of
operation calls possible in an implementation. Instead, operations are
regarded as atomic and notions such as linearizability are used to
verify correctness. When concurrent objects are run on multicore
processors implementing a weak memory model, the question arises as to
whether specifications should also abstract from the weak memory
effects. Recent work in which specifications do abstract from these
effects proves that the original definition of linearizability still
equates with correctness. This talk examines the alternative point of
view by allowing weak memory effects in specifications, and examine the
consequences in terms of the necessary weakening of linearizability
required, and the allowable implementations of typical concurrent
objects.

Lindsay Groves

**Verifying programs that use concurrent data structures**

  

It is widely claimed that linearisability is the generally accepted
correctness condition for shared data structures (aka shared objects).
Yet, there have been many proposals for alternative correctness (or
consistency) conditions. Curiously, these alternatives are tyically
(possibly even invariably) motivated by the desire to allow more
efficient implementations, or some other theoretical considerations,
rather that by any consideration for correctness or when such conditions
might be appropirate.

In this talk, we will look more closely at just what linearisability
means from the point of view of clients that use a shared data
structure, considering such questions as: How does the fact that a
concurrent data structure is linearisable help us to verify a client
which uses the data structure? Do clients actually need the shared to be
linearisable, or would a weaker condition sometimes be sufficient - and
if so, when? Time permitting, we will also look briefly at the question
of just what it means to be a concurrent version of a familiar
sequential data structure such as a stack, queue, etc, and whether a
more appropirate semantic decription might be possible.

Walter Guttmann

**Connecting Fixpoints of Computations with Strict Progress**

  

We study the semantics of recursion for computations that make strict
progress. The underlying unified computation model has an abstract
notion of progress, which instantiates in ways such as longer traces,
passing of real time, or counting the number of steps. Recursion is
given by least fixpoints in a unified approximation order. Other
time-based models define the semantics of recursion by greatest
fixpoints in the implication order. We give sufficient criteria for when
least fixpoints in the approximation order coincide with greatest
fixpoints in the implication order.

Larissa Meinicke

**An algebraic treatment of local variables in rely/guarantee  
concurrency**

  

The rely/guarantee approach of Jones extends Hoare logic with rely and
guarantee conditions in order to allow compositional reasoning about
shared-variable concurrent programs. In this talk we focus on
localisation in the context of rely/guarantee concurrency in order to
support local variables. To support the mechanisation of the
rely/guarantee approach, we have developed a synchronous concurrent
refinement algebra. Its foundation consists small set of primitive
commands plus a small set of primitive operators from which all
remaining constructs are defined. To support local variables we add a
primitive localisation operator to our algebra that is used to define
local variable blocks. From this we can prove properties of
localisation, including its interaction with rely and guarantee
conditions.

Dirk Pattinson

**Modular Synthesis of Verified Verifiers of Computation with STV
Algorithms**

  

Single transferable vote (STV) is a family of preferential voting
systems, different instances of which are used in binding elections
throughout the world. We give a formal specification of this family,
from which we derive fully verified tools that verify the computation
for various instances of STV vote counting. These tools validate an
execution of an STV vote counting algorithm, based on a transcript of
the count.

Our framework distils the similarities and differences of various
instances of STV and gives a uniform and modular way of synthesising
verifiers for its various instances, and provides the flexibility and
ease for adapting and extending it to a variety of STV schemes. We
minimise the trusted base in correctness of the tools produced by using
the HOL4 and CakeML as the technical basis. We first formally specify
and verify the tools in HOL4 and then obtain the machine executable
versions for the tools by relying on the verified proof translator and
the compiler of CakeML. Moreover, proofs that we establish in HOL4 and
CakeML are almost completely automated so that new verified instances of
STV can be created with no (or minimal) extra proof. Finally, our
experimental results with executable code demonstrate feasibility of
deploying the framework for verifying real size elections having an STV
counting algorithm.

Mark Utting

**Verifying Whiley Programs with Boogie**

  

The quest to develop increasingly sophisticated verification systems
continues unabated. Tools such as Dafny, Spec#, ESC/Java, SPARK Ada, and
Whiley attempt to seamlessly integrate specification and verification
into a programming language, in a similar way to type checking.

A common integration approach is to translate these input languages into
a “high-level” intermediate verification language such as Boogie, which
then handles the generation of verification conditions. This provides a
nice separation of concerns, and allows different theorem provers to be
used interchangeably.

In this talk, we describe a formal set of rules for translating Whiley
into Boogie, and the challenges that arose in formalising the
translation. We also demonstrate three kinds of unsoundness that arose,
and the solutions that we took.

Henry O’Brien

**Challenges in Formal Verification of Software Defined Networks**

  

In this presentation we will present an overview of the different ways
of specifying SDNs and the correctness issues they face. We will also
present a summary of the main verification techniques used to verify the
correctness along with their limitations. We will outline our approach
to overcoming some of these limitations.

Rob van Glabbeek

**A Process Algebra for Link Layer Protocols**

  

We propose a process algebra for link layer protocols, featuring a
unique mechanism for modelling frame collisions. We also formalise
suitable liveness properties for link layer protocols specified in this
framework. To show applicability we model and analyse two versions of
the Carrier-Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA)
protocol. Our analysis confirms the hidden station problem for the
version without virtual carrier sensing. However, we show that the
version with virtual carrier sensing not only overcomes this problem,
but also the exposed station problem with probability 1. Yet the
protocol cannot guarantee packet delivery, not even with probability 1.

This is joint work with Peter Höfner and Michael Markl

Patrick Meiring

**Sandbox Types for Object-Capabilities**

  

I will present "Sandbox Types for Object-Capabilities": a lightweight
approach for sandboxing application components written in
object-capability languages. The approach uses a type system for
constraining the references reachable from sandboxed objects and
achieves security guarantees similar to OS-level sandboxes (in that
components are restricted to using its host system via a limited
interface).

I will show how our work contributes to the goal of writing more secure
systems, demonstrate its implementation in Java, and provide an overview
of its soundness proof in Isabelle/HOL.

