---
title: 2023
date: 2023-06-01
template: page.html
---

## Program

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Thursday, 01 June
2023</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">9.30 – 10.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Welcome</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.00 – 10.35</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Ian Hayes</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Reasoning about distribution properties in a concurrent
refinement algebra</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.35 – 11.05</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.05 – 11.40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rajeev Gore</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>CEGARBox(Ktn): Improved decision procedures for multimodal tense
description logic ALCI</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.40 – 12.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Zhe
Hou</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A Parallel and Distributed Quantum SAT Solver Based on
Entanglement and Quantum Teleportation</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">12.15 – 14.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.15 –14.50</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Naipeng
Dong</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Verifying Concurrency in Blockchain: From Application Layer to
Consensus Layer</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.50 – 15.25</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Daniel Britten</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Provably Correct Smart Contracts using DeepSEA</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">15.30 – 16.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.00 – 16.35</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Horacio Quiles</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Deductive Verification of Smart Contracts with
Dafny</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.35 – 17.10</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Amos
Robinson</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Pipit: early work verifying reactive control systems in
F*</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Friday, 02 June
2023</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">9.00 – 9.35</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Annabelle McIver</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Leakage Logic for programs</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">9.35 – 10.10</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Natasha
Fernandes</strong> </span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Formal analysis of utility in privacy pipelines using
quantitative information flow and Kronecker products</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.10 – 10.40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Morning Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.40 – 11.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Robert Sison</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Formalising the Prevention of Microarchitectural Timing Channels
by Operating Systems</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.15 – 11.50</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Scott Buckley</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Will it bend? Plugging a real microkernel (seL4) into our generic
time protection model</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">12.00 – 14.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Lunch</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.00 – 14.35</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Athanasios
Evangelou-Oost</strong> </span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Trace models of concurrent valuation algebras</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.35 – 15.10</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Weiyou Wang</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Enabling Preserving Bisimulation Equivalence</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">15.10 – 15.40</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Afternoon Tea</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">15.40 – 16.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Ralf
Huuck</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Static Analysis: A Billion Dollars Later</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.15 – 16.50</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Matthew
Roberts</strong></span><br />
</p>
<p><em>The Teaching for Formal Methods in Australia and New
Zealand</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">17.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Close of workshop</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


## Abstracts

Ian Hayes  

**Reasoning about distribution properties in a concurrent refinement
algebra**

  

Distribution properties are important for algebraic reasoning in
arithmetic and logic. They are equally important for algebraic reasoning
about concurrent programs. While parallel composition of a command d
distributes over a non-deterministic choice between commands, parallel
composition of d only distributes over a sequential composition of
commands provided d satisfies suitable restrictions. We are also
concerned with distribution of a parallel composition of d into an
iteration. Again this only holds for suitable restrictions on d, and the
restrictions for distribution into a finite iteration are weaker than
those required for distribution into a (possibly) infinite iteration.
Our algebra also includes a weak conjunction (specification) operator.
Parallel composition and weak conjunction share many properties. Our
approach is to introduce an abstract synchronisation operator that can
be instantiated to either parallel composition or weak conjunction, and
prove the distribution properties, once, for the abstract
synchronisation operator. To support the rely/guarantee approach of
Jones, his rely and guarantee conditions are encoded as rely and
guarantee commands, which may be combined with precondition and
postcondition commands using weak conjunction to form a rely/guarantee
specification of a concurrent operation. The rely and guarantee commands
satisfy the restrictions for distribution over sequential composition
and into iterations, both finite and infinite. The distribution
properties can also be applied to evolution guarantees and generalised
invariants, which are also encoded as commands.

---

Rajeev Gore (with Cormac Kikkert and Robert McArthur)  

**CEGARBox(Ktn): Improved decision procedures for multimodal tense
description logic ALCI**

  

We extend the monomodal CEGAR-tableaux of Gore and Kikkert to normal
multimodal (description) logic Kn (ALC) with global assumptions
(TBoxes). We show how to handle the five basic extensions of seriality
(KD), reflexivity (KT), transitivity (K4), euclideanness (K5), and
symmetry (KB), individually, but in three different ways. We extend the
CEGAR-tableaux for Kn to multimodal tense (description) logic Ktn (ALCI)
with global assumptions (TBoxes) by “compiling in” the residuation
conditions between the “future” and “past” modalities. We describe how
we refactored our Haskell implementation called CEGARBox into CEGARBox++
using C++. We describe and analyse the effect of multiple optimisations
which speed up proof-search and then provide experimental evidence that
CEGARBox++ is the current best satisfiability-checker for all of these
logics, sometimes by multiple orders of magnitude.

---

Zhe Hou  

**A Parallel and Distributed Quantum SAT Solver Based on Entanglement
and Quantum Teleportation**

  

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solving is a fundamental problem in
computer science. Finding efficient algorithms for SAT solving has broad
implications in many areas of computer science and beyond. Quantum SAT
solvers have been proposed in the literature based on Grover’s
algorithm. Although existing quantum SAT solvers can consider all
possible inputs at once, they evaluate each clause in the formula one by
one sequentially, making the time complexity O(m) — linear to the number
of clauses m — per Grover iteration. In this work, we develop a parallel
quantum SAT solver, which reduces the time complexity in each iteration
from linear time O(m) to constant time O(1) by utilising extra entangled
qubits. To further improve the scalability of our solution in case of
extremely large problems, we develop a distributed version of the
proposed parallel SAT solver based on quantum teleportation such that
the total qubits required are shared and distributed among a set of
quantum computers (nodes), and the quantum SAT solving is accomplished
collaboratively by all the nodes. We have proved the correctness of our
approaches and demonstrated them in simulations.

---

Naipeng Dong  

**Verifying Concurrency in Blockchain: From Application Layer to
Consensus Layer**

  

The blockchain technology, also known as the distributed ledger, has
undergone several stages of significant evolution, leading to a complex
architecture with multiple layers. Due to its decentralized nature,
concurrency issues are pervasive throughout the entire blockchain
architecture. Our work explores how concurrency issues manifest
themselves at the application layer taking smart contracts as example,
and at the consensus layers taking a Byzantine Fault Tolerant algorithm
as an example, and discusses its relevance to blockchain security, and
then apply formal verification methods to address these challenges for
improving the overall robustness of the entire blockchain system.


---

Daniel Britten  

**Provably Correct Smart Contracts using DeepSEA**

  

It is possible to download a piece of software over the internet and
then verify its correctness locally using an appropriate trusted proof
system. However, on a blockchain like Ethereum, smart contracts cannot
be altered once deployed. This guarantee of immutability makes it
possible for end users to interact collectively with a ’networked’ piece
of software, with the same opportunity to verify its correctness. Formal
verification of smart contracts on a blockchain therefore offers an
unprecedented opportunity for end users to collectively interact with a
deployed instance of software that they can verify while not relying on
a central authority. The DeepSEA system, along with the Coq Proof
Assistant, could serve as a proof system making this possible. This talk
will discuss research undertaken related to extending the DeepSEA
system.

---

Horacio Mijail Anton Quiles  

**Deductive Verification of Smart Contracts with Dafny**

  

We present a methodology to develop verified smart contracts. We write
smart contracts, their specifications and implementations in the
verification-friendly language Dafny. In our methodology the ability to
write specifications, implementations and to reason about correctness is
a primary concern. We propose a simple, concise yet powerful solution to
reasoning about contracts that have external calls. This includes
arbitrary re- entrancy which is a major source of bugs and attacks in
smart contracts. Although we do not yet have a compiler from Dafny to
EVM bytecode, the results we obtain on the Dafny code can reasonably be
assumed to hold on Solidity code: the translation of the Dafny code to
Solidity is straightforward. As a result our approach can readily be
used to develop and deploy safer contracts.


---

Amos Robinson  

**Pipit: early work verifying reactive control systems in F\***

  

Safety-critical control systems, such as the anti-lock braking systems
in most cars today, need to be correct and execute in real-time. We
could write these systems directly in an imperative language such as C
or Rust and verify them, but it can be difficult to state high-level
specifications about such low-level implementations. Another approach,
favoured by large parts of the aerospace industry, is to implement the
controllers in a high-level language such as Lustre or SCADE, and verify
that the implementations satisfy the high-level specification using a
model-checker. These model-checkers can prove many interesting
properties automatically, but do not provide many options when the
automated proof techniques fail. In this talk I will describe my
preliminary work on Pipit, an embedded domain-specific language for
implementing and verifying such controllers in F\*. Pipit aims to
provide a high-level language similar to Lustre, while reusing F\*’s
proof automation and manual proofs for verifying controllers, and using
LowStar’s C-code generation for real-time execution. Pipit translates
its expression language to a transition system for k-inductive proofs,
which is mostly verified; verifying the translation to imperative code
is future work.

Amos Robinson did his PhD in streaming programming languages and stream
fusion at UNSW in Sydney, Australia. For the past three years he was
working at a self-driving car company where he verified these sorts of
control systems. He has just started a postdoc at the Australian
National University, where he will be working with Alex Potanin.


---

Annabelle McIver  

**Leakage Logic for programs**

  

An information-flow analysis views a program as a system that processes
“high security” secret information, e.g. passwords; but sometimes
programs’ treatment of secrets can be correlated to observed behaviour,
or other data of “low security”. Those programs then “leak” information
when an adversary can infer something about the “high security” secret
by using their knowledge of the program code, and observing real-time
behaviours such as control flow, timings, or low- security correlations.
In such programs verification usually entails quantifying the amount of
information that the program leaks. Interestingly, some inputs are more
vulnerable than others and an important goal of such formal analysis is
to identify which inputs are most vulnerable.

In this talk I shall explain how to specify leakage bounds on programs
that can be verified directly using a logic of information leakages. The
leakage logic is based on the g-leakage framework for analysing
quantitative security propeties; importantly verification steps are
similar to the backwards reasoning in standard functional verification.

A number of examples will be presented to illustrate the mathematical
properties of leakage logic.


---

Natasha Fernandes  

**Formal analysis of utility in privacy pipelines using quantitative
information flow and Kronecker products**

  

Systems which process sensitive information scheduled for public release
typically require privacy protections to protect the sensitive
attributes in the data, while also allowing useful information to be
extracted from the release. This balance is usually achieved
empirically, following the assumption that increasing the level of
privacy in the system naturally corresponds to a decrease in the
resulting utility. In this talk I will present a formal analysis showing
that the above assumption does not always hold: that in fact one can
achieve more privacy and more utility at the same time. For privacy we
use the well-known definition of differential privacy, and for utility
we use a standard Bayesian consumer model. Our formal analysis of the
above phenomenon uses existing concepts from quantitative information
flow, and introduces Kronecker products, which provide an algebra for
composability under the “local” model for differential privacy. This
approach offers the prospect of formal-analysis tools for utility that
complement extant formal analyses of privacy.


---

Robert Sison  

**Formalising the Prevention of Microarchitectural Timing Channels by
Operating Systems**

  

Microarchitectural timing channels are a well-known mechanism for
information leakage. Time protection has recently been demonstrated as
an operating-system mechanism able to prevent them. However, established
theories of information-flow security are insufficient for verifying
time protection, which must distinguish between (legal) overt and
(illegal) covert flows. We provide a machine-checked formalisation of
time protection via a dynamic, observer-relative, intransitive
nonleakage property over a careful model of the state elements that
cause timing channels. We instantiate and prove our property over a
generic model of OS interaction with its users, demonstrating for the
first time the feasibility of proving time protection for OS
implementations. This work was first presented in March at FM 2023.


---

Scott Buckley  

**Will it bend? Plugging a real microkernel (seL4) into our generic time
protection model**

  

In our earlier work, we built a generic kernel model that enforces time
protection, distilling formal requirements and showing that a
microkernel that meets those requirements will correctly enforce time
protection. Recently our task has been to prove that seL4’s time
protection mechanisms satisfy these requirements. seL4’s existing
specification and proofs are over a million lines of Isabelle – making
any changes to the abstract specification will create significant work
repairing its proofs. I will discuss how we accomplished the task of
bending seL4 into the right shape to be able to prove time protection
properties about it, while minimising breakages to its existing model
and proofs.


---

Athanasios Evangelou-Oost  

**Trace models of concurrent valuation algebras**

  

We introduce concurrent valuation algebras (CVAs), algebraic structures
that build upon valuation algebras and offer significant potential for
the specification and modelling of concurrent and distributed systems.
Our study begins with an introduction to a variant of valuation algebras
based on a presheaf formulation devised by Abramsky and Caru, in
conjunction with the Grothendieck construction. We proceed to define a
CVA, which comprises two valuation algebra structures on a space, where
combine operators adhere to a weak exchange law. This structure is
inspired by the structures of a Concurrent Kleene Algebra and of a
2-monoidal/duoidal category. We discuss morphisms between valuation
algebras and CVAs, as well as additional structures and results relating
to extension operations and valuation algebras induced by tuple systems.
Moreover, we indicate how the classical reasoning methodologies of Hoare
and rely-guarantee logics for concurrent programs can be expressed
within the algebraic structure of a CVA. Finally, we outline several
trace models for CVAs with practical relevance, including action, state,
and relative state trace models.

Our findings pave the way for future research on the applications of
CVAs to the specification and modelling of concurrent and distributed
systems, and the import of the highly effective and practical local
computation framework of valuation algebras to this realm.

---

Weiyou Wang  

**On the way towards justness**

  

Most fairness assumptions used for verifying liveness properties are
criticised for being too strong or unrealistic. On the other hand,
justness, arguably the minimal fairness assumption required for the
verification of liveness properties, is not preserved by classical
semantic equivalences, such as strong bisimilarity.

In this talk, we will discuss (1) labelled transition systems upgraded
with a successor relation to capture the notion of justness, (2)
enabling preserving bisimulation equivalence (ep-bisimilarity), a finer
alternative to strong bisimilarity, which preserves justness, and (3)
our recent work enriching the well-known De Simone format and showing
that ep-bisimilarity is a congruence for operators and recursion,
regarding all process algebras in this format.


---

Ralf Huuck  

**Static Analysis: A Billion Dollars Later**

  

Static analysis has come a long way from compiler construction and
optimisation to forming the core of application security tooling for
most software companies on the planet. Similarly, the underlying
technologies have been changing from early pattern matching and data
flow techniques to the inclusion of formal methods, constraint solving
and AI. However, not all that is feasible in academia gets adopted by
industry. The reasons are manifold and sometimes surprising. In this
talk we give an overview of different static analysis techniques, their
uptake in industry and some of the barriers to entry. Moreover, we
highlight a few drivers in industry that can potentially inspire new
research directions.

Ralf is a recovering academic and entrepreneur with a background in
formal methods and software security. He received a PhD in Computer
Science from the University of Kiel, Germany, and had been a long time
research leader at NICTA/DATA61. He led the static analysis security
spinout Goanna Software, which was later acquired by Synopys and forms
part of their Coverity SAST product. Recently Ralf has been leading
Logilica, a boutique consulting and software productivity company,
counting many major players as their customers.

---

Matthew Roberts  

**The Teaching for Formal Methods in Australia and New Zealand**

  

We present the results of research examining which tertiary institutions
in Australia and New Zealand offer formal methods courses. We categorise
and compare the offerings according to ACM curriculum categories. The
aim of this research is to inform institutions planning on offering or
redeveloping formal methods and to ignite a discussion amongst the
formal methods community about the best way to teach formal methods.
