---
title: 2024
date: 2024-06-01
template: page.html
---


## Program


<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Wednesday, 29 May
2024</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.00 – 10.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Carroll Morgan</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Getting the message across</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.15 – 11.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Zhe Hou</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Compositionally Automating Separation Logic for
Foundational<br />
Verification by Algebraic Transformation of Data
Refinement</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.45 – 12.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rajeev Gore</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Verified Tableaux: from modal to modal fixpoint
logics</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">12.15 – 12.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Aaron Bryce</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>A Constructive Proof of the Consistency<br />
of Peano Arithmetic Using Ordinal Assignments</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.45 –15.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Alicia Michael</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>BASIL: Binary Analysis for Secure Information Flow Logics<br />
on Concurrent Code</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">15.15 – 15.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Pengbo Yan</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Combining Classical and Probabilistic Independence
Reasoning<br />
to Verify the Security of Oblivious Algorithms</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.15 – 16.45</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Daniel Cumming</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>KMIR: Concrete and Symbolic Execution of Rust MIR Through
K</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.45 – 17.15</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Micah Brown</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Ironbark: A Formally Verifiable Processor</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><strong>Thursday, 30 May
2024</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">9.00 – 9.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Toby Murray</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Assume but Verify:<br />
Deductive Verification of Leaked Information in Concurrent
Applications</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">9.30 – 10.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Gernot Heiser</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Lions OS – towards a verified operating system</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">10.50 – 11.20</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Rob Sison</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Two new frontiers for seL4’s refinement proofs:<br />
Time protection and OS service verification</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">11.20 – 11.50</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Johannes Åman
Pohjola</strong> </span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Pancake: a language for verification-friendly systems
programming</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.00 – 14.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Gabriel Nunes</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>The Privacy-Utility Trade-off in the Topics API</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">14.30 – 15.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Luigi Soares</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Privacy Risk Assessment for Open Banking</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">15.30 – 16.00</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>Zhongkui Ma</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>ReLU Hull Approximation</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">16.00 – 16.30</td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><span><strong>James Tobler</strong>
</span><br />
</p>
<p><em>Formally Verifying Robustness Certification for Neural Networks
in Dafny</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


## Abstracts

Carroll Morgan (UNSW) 

 **Getting the message across**
  

We are all here because we advocate, practise, research and teach Formal
Methods... which began \> 50 years ago. Yet -most- undergraduate
students who graduate from Computer-Science courses world-wide do not
know what Formal Methods is — and certainly don’t use it. The rest of us
are paying the price for that, every day.

This talk describes some aspects of an in-the-lecture actual teaching
style for Formal Methods, one that has had some success at UNSW: the
style is intended to get the FM message across to that majority of
students who will otherwise never encounter it and –if possible– even to
excite them. The associated course concerned is called "(In-) Formal
Methods", and a textbook "Formal Methods, Informally" for it will be
published by CUP (soon).

But the aim of the talk here is not advertising, because this audience
does not need it — rather it is to encourage discussion among us on
similar teaching styles developed by "others of the Faithful", those
here at this meeting, and to exchange ideas (or perhaps create new ones)
of how we can go further.

An earlier talk, on how one might -assess- students in such a course,
can be found at [https://panopto.abo.fi/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=1688654f-9933-4053-83bd-b12600b7e091](https://panopto.abo.fi/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=1688654f-9933-4053-83bd-b12600b7e091)

---
  
Zhe Hou (Griffith University)   

  **Compositionally Automating Separation Logic   for Foundational Verification by Algebraic Transformation of Data Refinement**

Foundational verification considers the functional correctness of real
programming languages with formalised semantics and uses proof
assistants (e.g., Coq, Isabelle) to certify proofs. The need for
verifying real languages compels it to involve expressive Separation
Logics (SLs) that exceed the scopes of well-studied automated proof
theories, e.g., symbolic heap. Consequently, foundational verification
relies heavily on ad-hoc heuristics that lack a systematic meta-theory
for automation. We aim to mitigate the gap by proposing a generic
automation method that  
1) unifies data refinement with separation logic to lift concrete data
structures to abstract models; 2) is based on axiomatised algebraic
properties to generically automate verification on any data structures
that satisfy the axioms. The properties capture high-level semantics of
data structures, boosting the automation by such high-level knowledge.
As a result, we present the first generic and scalable theory of SL
automation for foundational verification. Case studies on formalised C
semantics show our theory instantiates reasoning procedures for 10
widely-used data structures automatically, including an AVL tree and a
bucket hash map. For example, our framework can automate the
verification of programs like quicksort in Isabelle/HOL with only 10
lines of annotations and manual proofs, significantly reducing the
manual effort compared to existing methods (90 lines of proofs).

 --- 

Rajeev Gore and Anthony Peigne (ANU)   

 **Verified Tableaux: from modal to modal fixpoint logics**
  

I will first give a simple example of how to automatically extract an
OCaml program for adding two natural numbers using Coq’s extraction
facility. To do so, we need to encode a logic program "add n m r" which
encodes "n + m = r" and convince Coq that "for all n and m, there is a
terminating algorithm to compute r such that add n m r holds".
Constructively.

I will then explain how we used Coq to extract a formally verified OCaml
program for deciding LTL-satisfiability where LTL is the linear temporal
logic of "next" and "until" over the natural number line.

I will first introduce the syntax and semantics of LTL. Then explain the
tableaux rules for LTL. Then explain how we encoded these rules in Coq
and the theorems that we proved. Finally, I will show some performance
figures comparing our OCaml implementation versus the one of Florian
Widmann (an ex-phd student of mine).

It’s all supposed to be introductory!

All the hard work was done by Anthony but he cannot attend.

---
  
Aaron Bryce (ANU)  

 **A Constructive Proof of the Consistency of Peano Arithmetic Using
Ordinal Assignments**
  

Gentzen’s 1936 proof of the consistency of Peano Arithmetic was a
significant result in the foundations of mathematics. We provide here a
modified version of the proof, based on Gödel’s reformulation, and
including additional details and minor corrections which are necessary
to definitively prove the well-foundedness of the cut-elimination
argument in a constructive environment. All results have been verified
using the Coq theorem prover.

---
  
Alicia Michael (DSTG)  

 **BASIL: Binary Analysis for Secure Information Flow Logics on
Concurrent Code**


Information flow logics for detecting security leaks in programs have
reached a high level of maturity, supporting value-dependent security
classifications of program variables, i.e., security classifications
which evolve as the program executes, and thread-local reasoning over
concurrent code. To put these logics into practice, however, requires
further considerations. Firstly, it is well known that compiler
optimisations can violate security guarantees established on source
code, and hence analysis must take place on binaries. Secondly, for
scalability the logics must be supported by automated tools and these
tools need to be at least trusted, if not provably sound. In this paper,
we present BASIL, a tool for applying information flow logics to lifted
AArch64 binaries using the Boogie automated program verifier. A high
level of trust is provided by the wide user base of Boogie, which has
been employed as a back-end for many other tools over almost two
decades. The lifter we use has also been derived from Arm’s AArch64
machine-readable formal semantics.

---

Pengbo Yan (University of Melbourne) 

 **Combining Classical and
Probabilistic Independence Reasoning to Verify the Security of Oblivious
Algorithms**

  

We consider the problem of how to verify the security of probabilistic
oblivious algorithms formally and systematically. Unfortunately, prior
program logics fail to support a number of complexities that feature in
the semantics and invariant needed to verify the security of many
practical probabilistic oblivious algorithms. We propose an approach
based on reasoning over perfectly oblivious approximations, using a
program logic that combines both classical Hoare logic reasoning and
probabilistic independence reasoning to support all the needed features.
We formalise and prove our new logic sound in Isabelle/HOL and apply our
approach to formally verify the security of several challenging case
studies beyond the reach of prior methods for proving obliviousness.

---
  
Daniel Cumming (Runtime Verification) 

 **KMIR: Concrete and Symbolic Execution of Rust MIR Through K**
  

Rust is a nascent systems language, continually rising in popularity.
Recently, many projects have approached providing formal methods
solutions for program analysis. However many of these tools have
restrictions on subset of Rust they target, or a challenging user
interface for developers inexperienced in formal methods to adopt. We
aim to provide deductive verification and symbolic execution for the
Rust MIR (Middle Intermediate Representation) by encoding the
operational semantics of MIR in K, and leveraging the tools
automatically produced through the K ecosystem. Furthermore, we plan to
implement a property verification framework to allow Rust developers the
simplest user interaction possible for transitioning from testing to
verification.

---
  
Micah Brown (DSTG)  

 **Ironbark: A Formally Verifiable Processor**
  

This presentation will discuss the approach taken to try and work
towards being able to deploy a useful system which can be shown and
verified to be secure from any remote attack. It focuses on the secure
processor, named “Ironbark” which provides a foundation for this aim. It
will cover some of the key considerations, the formal engineering
required, and some of the key results achieved so far.

  
---

Toby Murray (University of Melbourne)   

 **Assume but Verify:  
Deductive Verification of Leaked Information in Concurrent
Applications**

  

We consider the problem of specifying and proving the security of
non-trivial, concurrent programs that intentionally leak information. We
present a method that decomposes the problem into (a) proving that the
program only leaks information it has declassified via assume
annotations already widely used in deductive program verification; and
(b) auditing the declassifications against a declarative security
policy. We show how condition (a) can be enforced by an extension of the
existing program logic SecCSL, and how (b) can be checked by proving a
set of simple entailments. Part of the challenge is to define respective
semantic soundness criteria and to formally connect these to the logic
rules and policy audit. We support our methodology in an auto-active
program verifier, which we apply to verify the implementations of
various case study programs against a range of declassification
policies.

  
---

Gernot Heiser (UNSW)  

**Lions OS – towards a verified operating system**

  

The seL4 microkernel is arguably the most highly assured operating
system (OS) kernel, featuring a complete proof chain from high-level
security properties to the functional specification of its operation to
the implementation and ultimately the executable binary. This proof
chain is complete for the 32-bit Arm and 64-bit RISC-V architectures,
while the functional correctness proof exists for the 64-bit Arm and x86
architectures.

However, the microkernel itself provides little more than mechanisms for
secure multiplexing of hardware, everything else is left to usermode
components. Unfortunately, our experience has shown that using seL4 well
to build practical secure systems is hard, it requires deep OS
expertise. We have now embarked on designing, implementing and verifying
Lions OS, a complete seL4-based OS aimed at the
embedded/IoT/cyberphsical space, which is where most seL4 deployments
happen these days. Lions OS is based on the seL4 Microkit, an
abstraction layer that drastically simplifies the programming model (by
specialising to static system architectures, which match the
requirements of the target domain).

In the talk I will first provide a refresher on seL4, its verification
story, and then discuss on-going work on the kernel itself, which
includes Time Protection, the principled prevention of
microarchitectural timing channels. It will then the give an overview of
the Microkit, followed by the core ideas behind Lions OS, and a
description of its present state. This will set the scene for the
related UNSW talks: Rob Sison will discuss on-going work on proving time
protection, as well as the use of SMT solvers for verifying Lions OS
components and how to connect this to the seL4 proofs. Johannes Åman
Pohjola will present the Pancake programming language we will be using
to implement and verify (parts of) Lions OS.

  
---

Rob Sison (UNSW)  

**Two new frontiers for seL4’s refinement proofs:  
Time protection and OS service verification**

  

This talk will give a brief overview on the status of ongoing and
planned research and development at Trustworthy Systems to expand the
scope of the seL4 kernel’s refinement proofs in two directions: (1)
refinement (downwards) to prove seL4 implements time protection
correctly at the C specification level and lower, and (2) abstraction
(refinement’s dual, upwards) of the kernel’s functional specification to
a form suitable for SMT-based automated verification of the user-level
seL4 Microkit and Lions OS service components built on top it. Here I
will lay out the research and engineering challenges facing us on both
these fronts and the planned subprojects for which we are seeking
talented PhD students, postdocs and engineers to tackle them.

---
  
Johannes Åman Pohjola (UNSW)  

**Pancake: a language for verification-friendly systems programming**


We introduce Pancake, an in-development language for verifiable,
low-level systems programming, especially device drivers. Pancake
features a very simple type system that makes it attractive to systems
programmers, while at the same time aiming to ease the formal
verification of code. Pancake has a well-defined semantics which the
compiler is proven to preserve, meaning that each generated binary code
preserves the semantics of its original program. We will discuss the
design of the language, how we believe it eases verification, and how
exactly we plan to verify Pancake programs. There will be device
registers, there will be coalgebras—there’s something for everybody!

---
  
Gabriel Nunes (Macquarie University)  

**The Privacy-Utility Trade-off in the Topics API**

  

Third-party cookies have been a privacy concern since cookies were first
developed in the mid 1990s, but more strict cookie policies were only
introduced by Internet browser vendors in the early 2010s. More
recently, due to regulatory changes, browser vendors have started to
completely block third-party cookies, with both Firefox and Safari
already compliant.

The Topics API is being proposed by Google as an additional and less
intrusive source of information for interest-based advertising (IBA),
following the upcoming deprecation of third-party cookies. Initial
results published by Google estimate the probability of a correct
re-identification of a random individual would be below 3% while still
supporting IBA.

We analyze the re-identification risk for individual Internet users
introduced by the Topics API from the perspective of Quantitative
Information Flow (QIF), an information- and decision-theoretic
framework. Our model allows a theoretical analysis of both privacy and
utility aspects of the API and their trade-off, and we show that the
Topics API does have better privacy than third-party cookies while
providing high utility to IBA companies.

  
---

Luigi D. C. Soares (Macquarie University)  

**Privacy Risk Assessment for Open Banking**

  

The term “open banking” describes a series of global initiatives to
allow the sharing of customer data between financial companies to
facilitate competition within their sector. In this project, we
formalise in the rigorous framework of quantitative information flow
(QIF) relevant privacy risks in a concrete open-banking scenario,
namely: (i) customer re-identification and transaction-history recovery
and (ii) collateral attribute-inferences using external correlations. We
provide extensive analyses of these risks in real-world data from open
banking, supplied by a fintech in Australia. We show that the
open-banking system studied presents considerable privacy risks with
respect to transactions, both in the presence and in the absence of
demographic data. Finally, we exemplify potential real-world collateral
attribute-inference attacks, in which we show how an attacker might
leverage scientific correlations to infer individuals’ level of
neuroticism and self-control from their transaction history. We hope
that this work may: (i) help financial customers in Australia make
better-informed decisions about what kind of information, and how much
of it, to share via open banking; (ii) raise awareness about the
potential privacy risks of open banking in other countries; and (iii)
foster the development of privacy regulation in digital finance and the
open data economy.

  
---

Zhongkui Ma (UQ)  

**ReLU Hull Approximation**

  

Neural networks have offered distinct advantages over traditional
techniques. However, the opaque neural networks render their performance
vulnerable, in the presence of adversarial samples. This underscores the
imperative of formal verification of neural networks, especially in the
safety-critical domain. Deep neural networks are composed of multiple
hidden layers with neurons, where mathematical operations stack linear
and nonlinear (activation functions) operations. Using linear
inequalities plays a crucial role in constraining and deducing the
ranges of results from nonlinear operations. Considering correlations
among input variables of multiple neurons leads to constraints known as
multi-neuron constraints, posing a non-trivial high-dimensional
challenge in computing the convex hull of functions. Our work is
dedicated to designing methods for computing multi-neuron constraints
for the ReLU function to serve the robustness verification of neural
networks. We have introduced a novel approach WRALU (Wrapping ReLU) for
computing the convex hull of a ReLU function (published in POPL’24).
This method significantly reduces computation time and complexity,
constructing fewer constraints to achieve more precise approximations
while handling higher dimensions.

  
---

James Tobler (University of Melbourne/DSTG)  

**Formally Verifying Robustness Certification for Neural Networks in Dafny**

  

Neural networks are often susceptible to minor perturbations in input
that can cause them to misclassify. A prominent solution to this problem
is the use of globally-robust neural networks, which employ a
certification function to check whether the classification of a given
output cannot be altered by such a perturbation. Outputs that pass this
test are called “certified robust” and are considered safe to return.
However, these certification functions have not yet been verified at the
implementation level, and they often rely on approximation-based
algorithms that do not guarantee soundness. To provide assurance that a
given output is robust, we implemented and verified a certification
function for globally-robust neural networks in Dafny. This presentation
describes an overview of the program, the specifications verified, the
important design decisions taken for the implementation, and an
evaluation of its performance and completeness.

  
